<GameLink slug="chrono_trigger" /> is possibly my all-time favorite RPG, but I've never played its sequel, Chrono Cross.
I'm not really sure what to expect with this one &mdash; many of the people involved with Chrono Trigger did _not_ work
on Chrono Cross, but the game seems pretty popular.

<GameHeader game={props.game} />

As a sequel to Chrono Trigger, Chrono Cross is a massive disappointment. It can be hard to remember it's even a sequel
at times &mdash; the gameplay mechanics are completely different, and the plot seems completely unrelated (outside of a
couple name-drops) for about half the game. However, once the plot connections _were_ finally revealed, I was even more
disappointed. But if we ignore that aspect, does Chrono Cross stand up on its own?

For most of the game, there is very little explanation about what is going on. Serge, the main character, is whisked
away to an alternate dimension. After regaining the ability to return to his home dimension, the game begins to feel
aimless. Lynx is introduced as the primary antagonist, but without any clear goals, so there is just that generic RPG
motive to "stop that bad guy, because he must be doing something bad." The game also kind of tries to force the other
main character, Kid, into the party several times, but you can actually choose to reject her. Kid's backstory and
motives are also barely explained for most of the game. I found myself losing interest in the game and debated
abandoning it.

The story does have its moments. There was a pretty unexpected plot twist about halfway (<Spoiler>switching bodies with
Lynx</Spoiler>) that captured my interest for awhile. However, the core plotline of what Lynx is actually trying to do
continues to be a mystery until the last third of the game or so. Unfortunately, the mysteries are revealed via lore
dump monologues before or after boss fights rather than seeing anything in cutscenes. This was extremely frustrating
and unsatisfying. I'm a huge believer in "show, don't tell." The last few hours of the game is a whirlwind of convoluted
(and barely explained) plot twists, and I just wanted the game to end already. I had to read summaries online to make
any sense of the story.

One of Chrono Cross's claims to fame is that there are 44 party characters available in the game. Unfortunately, these
characters have very little personality or impact on the story, and they basically all perform identically in combat.
This was probably my biggest disappointment. I'm a completionist, but it felt like a total waste of time collecting all
of these characters.

Characters share a combined party level ("star level"), which in theory means that you don't have to micromanage
leveling all 40+ characters evenly. However, in practice there are permanently missable small stat gains that can be
earned between star levels. Chrono Cross is not a hard game, but by the endgame I could clearly see the differences in
stats for the characters I used and the characters I did not use.

The battle system in Chrono Cross is pretty different from anything else I've seen so far. Three different levels of
basic attacks are available, providing a tradeoff between accuracy and strength. Successful attacks increase the
accuracy of future attacks, creating a simple combo system. Characters do not have MP in Chrono Cross &mdash; instead,
attacks charge up characters so that they can use elements (which includes both abilities and items). I had fun with
battles at first, but the elements became a pain to manage towards the end of the game. Furthermore, basic attacks
became so strong that there really wasn't much reason to bother with elements either.

Ultimately, Chrono Cross reminds me of <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_x_2" />: a thoroughly disappointing sequel that
deviated way too far from the original game.

<LikedDisliked>
  <LikedList>
    <LikedItem>No random encounters</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>No grinding</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Unique combat system</LikedItem>
  </LikedList>
  <DislikedList>
    <DislikedItem>Story is aimless early, ends with a mess of lore dumps</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Characters have minimal story, many are total filler</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>_Massive_ cast is essentially interchangable</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Managing elements (abilities) is tedious</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>By endgame, simple attacks are much better than elements</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Permanently missable stat gains</DislikedItem>
  </DislikedList>
</LikedDisliked>

After completing a game, I add it to [my overall enjoyment ranking](/ranking) which orders the games I've completed from
those I most enjoyed to those I least enjoyed. Like <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_viii" />, the story was a huge mess,
but at least that game had an interesting world and characters. I'll put Chrono Cross between that and
<GameLink slug="final_fantasy_ii" /> which was more annoying to play.

<GameRanking game={props.slug} />

<small>P.S. It's been two years since <GameLink slug="final_fantasy">my first entry</GameLink>!</small>
