Chrono Trigger is a pretty legendary game. It was created by a "dream team" of people who worked on both
<GameLink slug="final_fantasy" /> and <GameLink slug="dragon_quest" />, the two most famous RPG series of the time.
(Ironically, the companies behind these two franchises would end up merging 8 years later.) I've finished Chrono Trigger
multiple times already, but playing both Final Fantasy and Dragon Quest recently made me want to play this one again.

<GameHeader game={props.game} />

Despite all the hype about the dream team, in my opinion the game feels overwhelmingly more like a Final Fantasy than a
Dragon Quest. (I guess this makes sense, since it _is_ a Square game.)

Chrono Trigger is a very story-driven RPG with fast pacing and minimal side quests to distract you. The time travel plot
device is well written, and there are some good surprises along the way. There is also a good balance of humor between
the more serious moments. The game can be beaten in about 20 hours, which I found very refreshing compared to more
recent games which can easily take 80+ hours to finish.

Combat uses the famous ATB system first introduced in <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_iv" />. However, Chrono Trigger adds
a few improvements to this. First, positioning is important because techs may have AoE. The player cannot move the party
characters, but many enemies are frequently moving around during battle. Second, when 2 or 3 party members have full ATB
bars, they can act simultaneously to use double or triple techs. These techs can be much stronger or use different
elements than regular single techs. Both of these features make battle much more engaging because they add timing
elements. This is my favorite combat system from every turn-based RPG that I've played so far.

Chrono Trigger is ahead of its time (pun?) because it does not have random encounters. Enemies are in fixed locations in
dungeons, and there are no encounters on the world map. Getting too close to an enemy will trigger a battle, but the
player can attempt to skip combat by aviding the enemy. However, not all encounters can be avoided, and some enemies are
completely hidden before combat. There is some backtracking in this game due to the time travel, so I was very happy to
skip weak encounters later in the game.

Despite being nearly 30 years old, Chrono Trigger is still very aesthetically pleasing. The artwork has the same charm
as Dragon Quest (thanks to Akira Toriyama's designs), and the soundtrack is extremely memorable. The sprites in
particular are very expressive, similar to <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_v" /> and <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_vi" />.
Being a SNES game, there is neither FMV cutscenes nor voice acting, but I never felt the game needed it.

In my opinion, Chrono Trigger sets the bar for RPGs, or at least story-driven RPGs. It's a complete package: great
story, great pacing, great gameplay, great music, and great artwork. There's very little I would change about this game.
My only real critique is that while the party characters have distinct personalities, they don't have much background
or character growth (except for <Spoiler>Frog, Robo, and Magus</Spoiler>). In fact, <Spoiler>Ayla</Spoiler> is kind of
just along for the ride without much explanation or motivation. Crono being a silent protagonist (in classic Dragon
Quest style) doesn't help with this either.

<LikedDisliked>
  <LikedList>
    <LikedItem>Story-driven with great pacing</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>No random encounters</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Best combat in a turn-based RPG</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Wonderful soundtrack, great pixel art</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>No grinding</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>It's a short game</LikedItem>
  </LikedList>
  <DislikedList>
    <DislikedItem>Some party characters have little development or background</DislikedItem>
  </DislikedList>
</LikedDisliked>

After completing a game, I add it to [my overall enjoyment ranking](/ranking) which orders the games I've completed from
those I most enjoyed to those I least enjoyed. Chrono Trigger is my favorite RPG of all-time, and nothing in this
playthrough changed my mind about that.

<GameRanking game={props.slug} />
