Like the previous game, Dragon Quest&nbsp;VI was not originally released in the US so it's a lesser known title. Despite
this, I've actually played this version before. That was a long time ago, so I don't remember much, but I do have some
fond memories of it. I'm looking forward to playing this one again.

<GameHeader game={props.game} />

<TranslationNote name="NoPrgress&nbsp;(v0.90b2)" link="https://www.romhacking.net/translations/344/" />

Dragon Quest&nbsp;VI starts off very strong. I thought the "two worlds" plot device was done well and I was very
interested in the mysteries introduced early in the game. Unfortunately, after about 12 hours (<Spoiler>after defeating
Mudo</Spoiler>) the story falls apart. Much like <GameLink slug="dragon_quest_v" />, the game sort of devolves into just
exploring the map without really advancing the main story. Major villains are basically just stumbled upon and
immediately defeated without much foreshadowing or buildup. The plot does regain some focus at the end, but by that
point I had lost interest.

The game starts off very simple. Like <GameLink slug="dragon_quest_iv" />, several characters join the party and gain
abilities on level up. However, after about 12 hours, a job system is unlocked which really changes the game. Like
<GameLink slug="final_fantasy_v" />, jobs are leveled independently of the character's level and leveling jobs grants
new abilities. In addition to the 9 starting jobs, there are 7 more hybrid jobs that are unlocked by mastering other
jobs. I really enjoyed this mechanic and unlocking hybrid jobs for my party.

Unfortunately, the jobs are not well balanced. Previously, Dragon Quest offered a choice between basic physical attacks
and various magic attacks that could either be high damaging or hit multiple targets. Jobs in this game only grant
abilities &mdash; they do not permanently affect stats. To compensate for this, a bunch of "skills" were added for
physical jobs to unlock. Skills cost 0&nbsp;MP and some are very strong or hit multiple targets. Basically, skills are
just 0&nbsp;MP spells, which is totally broken. Magical jobs have their moments here and there (Firevolt is very strong
if you rush to it), but by the endgame I was using only physical jobs.

Monster catching returns from Dragon Quest&nbsp;V, though with an additional limitation &mdash; a party member must
currently be in the Beastmaster job. This really sucks because the Beastmaster job is otherwise not very useful, so
there is little incentive to use it. I recruited a few monsters early, but once my designated character mastered
Beastmaster and changed jobs, I did not replace them. Given how the job system works, it's difficult to justify
replacing a character who has progress in multiple jobs with a new monster anyway. On the plus side, monsters
are able to learn jobs just like regular characters, so I _do_ think it was worth it to recruit a few.

Ultimately, I was disappointed with Dragon Quest&nbsp;VI. Like <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_xii" />, I really enjoyed
the game in the beginning, but the game drags on and I just wanted to get it over with. I think this game has some
really good ideas but it does not execute them well.

<LikedDisliked>
  <LikedList>
    <LikedItem>Great story in first 12 hours</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Job system with hybrid jobs</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Reserve party members gain experience too</LikedItem>
  </LikedList>
  <DislikedList>
    <DislikedItem>Story falls apart after 12 hours and the game drags on</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Jobs (skills) are unbalanced</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>No fast way to grind jobs in the endgame</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Monster catching too restricted</DislikedItem>
  </DislikedList>
</LikedDisliked>

After completing a game, I add it to [my overall enjoyment ranking](/ranking) which orders the games I've completed from
those I most enjoyed to those I least enjoyed. It's kind of a tossup for me between this and Dragon Quest&nbsp;V, but
I think the latter was a little more consistent.

<GameRanking game={props.slug} />
