Dragon&nbsp;Quest&nbsp;XI came out at a time in my life where I was not playing many RPGs (or even video games at all),
so I completely missed all the buzz about it. This turned out to be serendipitous for me though, because a "definitive
edition" was released just two years later with extra content. I wasn't sure what to expect with this one &mdash; I
loved <GameLink slug="dragon_quest_viii" />, but I _hated_ <GameLink slug="dragon_quest_ix" /> (and Dragon Quest&nbsp;X
was an MMORPG).

<GameHeader game={props.game} />

<Note>Unlike <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_xv" />, the extra content and changes in Dragon Quest&nbsp;XI&nbsp;S are
_not_ available for the original base game, so I consider it a separate game.</Note>

Thankfully, Dragon&nbsp;Quest&nbsp;XI is a spiritual successor to Dragon Quest&nbsp;VIII. Both games feature memorable
characters and a clear central narrative, which are not a guarantee in a Dragon Quest game. Both games are also gorgeous
full 3D, though I prefer the cel shading style of Dragon Quest&nbsp;VIII.

The story was hit and miss for me. Act&nbsp;1 is fairly standard Dragon Quest stuff. Although there are a few scenes
related to the central narrative sprinkled in, the game is mostly just another adventure in search of arbitrary magic
items and bumping into things along the way. I didn't see Act&nbsp;2 coming, so when I thought the game was ending
with Act&nbsp;1, I was all ready to move on to something else. Act&nbsp;2 on the other hand really blew me away.
<Spoiler>The World of Darkness reminded me of <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_vi" />'s World of Ruin, but with a stronger
and more focused narrative.</Spoiler> I also liked how all the party characters really got fleshed out in Act 2. This
was probably my favorite part of any Dragon Quest game.

Surprisingly, the game continues in a significant way after the credits. While it has become common to add extra
challenges after the final boss, Dragon Quest&nbsp;XI actually resumes the story! Unfortunately, I really did not like
how the story progressed at this point, and I thought it ruined the original ending. <Spoiler>The sudden and barely
explained introduction of time travel is a complete _deus ex machina_ and it retcons all the emotional scenes and
character growth that happened in Act&nbsp;2. These plot points have to be resolved again in the post-game, but they are
mostly just hand-waved and it felt forced so that the game could continue. Similarly, the tie-in to
<GameLink slug="dragon_quest_iii" /> felt equally forced &mdash; while there were clear references to the game
throughout, it's only in true ending that Dragon Quest&nbsp;XI is explicitly revealed as a prequel. This felt like
cheap fan service, because it didn't add anything to either game.</Spoiler>

Mechanically, Dragon Quest&nbsp;XI pretty much had everything that I want in an RPG. Like many other modern games,
random encounters are replaced with monsters on the map, which makes it much easier to avoid battles if you don't need
the experience. The skill system from the previous games returns, but now it is clear when skills will be learned, skill
points can be even be reset (for a trivial amount of money). This really lowered my anxiety as I experimented with my
builds quite a few times during my play. Finally, while Dragon Quest&nbsp;XI has more party members than can participate
in battle, the reserve still gain experience from battles, even if they never appeared. I really appreciated this,
because I did not enjoy constantly shuffling characters around in <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_x" /> to share
experience.

Ultimately, Dragon Quest&nbsp;XI was a roller coaster of emotions for me: I was bored of it, then I was really into it,
and finally I was annoyed with it. It's a solid but unspectacular game, so I am unlikely to ever replay it. (It's also
very long!) One of the additions in the defintive edition is a separate 2D version that reenvisions the game as a
SNES-era Dragon Quest. I stayed completely in the 3D version this time (minus Tickington of course), so if I did ever
replay it, I would check that out and see how that changes things.

<LikedDisliked>
  <LikedList>
    <LikedItem>No random encounters</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Skill points can be reset</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Reserve party members still gain experience</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>No grinding required</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Act&nbsp;2 <Spoiler>World of Darkness</Spoiler></LikedItem>
  </LikedList>
  <DislikedList>
    <DislikedItem>Slow pacing, weaker narrative in Act&nbsp;1</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Post-game <Spoiler>time travel, retcons</Spoiler></DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Tickington is filler fan service</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Mute main character is awkward</DislikedItem>
  </DislikedList>
</LikedDisliked>

After completing a game, I add it to [my overall enjoyment ranking](/ranking) which orders the games I've completed from
those I most enjoyed to those I least enjoyed. Dragon Quest&nbsp;XI has its moments, but overall I found it to be a
thoroughly standard RPG. I'll place it below <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_xii" /> which was similarly uneven, but I'll
give the advantage to the game that starts off stronger.

<GameRanking game={props.slug} />
