I know very little about Dragon Quest&nbsp;IV. To be honest, I'm getting a little burned out on Dragon Quest as the
first three games did not have much story and required hefty amounts of grinding. Is Dragon Quest&nbsp;IV any different?

<GameHeader game={props.game} />

Thankfully, Dragon Quest&nbsp;IV has significantly more story than the previous games. In fact, the distinctive feature
of this game is how the story is divided into five chapters. Each chapter features a different main character which I
thought was a great way to introduce the characters and the story. I thought this was easily the best story of all the
NES RPGs that I have played so far. In previous Dragon Quest games, the stories felt very static &mdash; there's a bad
guy, he's over there, so go level up and defeat him. This time the plot unfolds _during_ the game which is much more
compelling. My only complaint is that party members do not have much personality or dialogue.

The game balance also seemed better than the previous games as there was less grinding required. However, every chapter
starts with a new character at level 1 again, so there is a little grinding required there to get started.

One of the new gameplay mechanics in Dragon Quest&nbsp;IV is the wagon. The wagon lets you easily change your active
party members, even during battle, without returning to town. Experience is also shared with party members in the wagon,
which reduces grinding and helps keep the other party members relevant. The only caveat for these features is that the
wagon must be present &mdash; it is unable to enter some dungeons.

The other gameplay mechanic is AI controlled party members, which seems pretty ambitious for 1990! There are a few guest
characters that join and leave the party during the quest and the AI controls them during battles. Furthermore, during
Chapter 5, all party members outside of the hero become AI controlled. I liked this feature at first because it speeds
up the common (i.e. boring) encounters where you just select your strongest attacks. However, later in the game this
became quite frustrating as the AI would make strange and ineffective choices about spells to cast. The worst case was
Cristo draining his MP repeatedly casting Beat and Defeat (instant death), even on bosses, instead of healing. By the
end of the game, I was just using my three best physical attackers and using the hero to heal.

Despite the annoying AI, I had a lot of fun with this game. It far exceeded my expectations for an NES RPG. The reduced
griding and the interesting story kept me hooked until the end.

<LikedDisliked>
  <LikedList>
    <LikedItem>Story divided across five chapters</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Wagon mechanic</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Memorable music</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Memorable final boss battle</LikedItem>
  </LikedList>
  <DislikedList>
    <DislikedItem>AI controls party members in Chapter 5</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Some grinding at the start of every chapter</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Characters have little dialogue, personality</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem><Spoiler>Esturk</Spoiler> is underwhelming</DislikedItem>
  </DislikedList>
</LikedDisliked>

After completing a game, I add it to [my overall enjoyment ranking](/ranking) which orders the games I've completed from
those I most enjoyed to those I least enjoyed. It's hard for me to choose between this and
<GameLink slug="final_fantasy_iii" />. Final Fantasy&nbsp;III has a big difficulty spike at the end, but I think Dragon
Quest&nbsp;IV's AI party members were more frustrating.

<GameRanking game={props.slug} />
