<GameLink slug="dragon_quest" /> was a hugely influential but very simple game that is not very enjoyable by modern
standards. Its huge success led to a direct sequel in less than a year. Does the sequel hold up better than the
original?

<GameHeader game={props.game} />

Dragon Quest II is a huge improvement over Dragon Quest. There are multiple party members and battles can contain
multiple enemies as well. This change alone has a huge impact on gameplay. The world map is much larger and there are
many dungeons to explore too (but thankfully torches were abandoned). About halfway through the game, exploration really
opens up when the party receives <Spoiler>the boat</Spoiler>. The game becomes non-linear at this point as there are
multiple MacGuffins to collect and you are free to do so in (almost) any order.

Like it's predecessor, Dragon Quest II does require a fair bit of grinding to advance safely. Unlike the first game, the
variety of places to go and dungeons to explore helps break up the monotony and makes things more interesting.
Unfortunately, things come crashing to a halt right before the final dungeon, <Spoiler>the Road to Rhone</Spoiler>.
While the game progressed fairly smoothly until this point, I had to stop and grind for hours here. The dungeon itself
is also very cruel: there's pitfall traps, endless loops, and confusing asymmetrical teleporters that effectively
prevent backtracking. This final section completely ruined the game for me.

Dragon Quest II has a few balance issues that worsen over the course of the game. Enemies can now appear in groups and
larger encounters are very dangerous. Enemies that can inflict sleep, damage the entire party, or &mdash; worst of all
&mdash; inflict instant death can be nearly impossible to deal with. These abilites become very common in the endgame,
which contributes to the extreme difficulty spike. Additionally, the magic-oriented party members become increasingly
less useful towards the end of the game as spell effects do not scale with levels. By the end of the game, the sole
"warrior" type character is the sole reliable source of damage, while the other two characters are just spamming healing
spells to keep everyone alive.

There is not much plot in Dragon Quest II, outside of the opening scene (which apparently was not in the original
Japanese release). While this is expected for the era, it means there is little payoff for enduring the brutal endgame.

In the end, I am conflicted about this game. I actually really enjoyed the first 10 hours, but the 5 hours of grinding
at the end completely ruined it for me. I think I have beaten a remake of this game before, but I don't remember it
being so painful &mdash; perhaps the remake(s) fixed the balance issues.

<LikedDisliked>
  <LikedList>
    <LikedItem>Big improvements over Dragon Quest</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Non-linear mid-game section</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>It's a short game</LikedItem>
  </LikedList>
  <DislikedList>
    <DislikedItem>_Extreme_ griding required for final dungeon</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Painful final dungeon: pitfall traps, mazes, instant death spells</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Poor character balance</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Minimal plot</DislikedItem>
  </DislikedList>
</LikedDisliked>

After completing a game, I add it to [my overall enjoyment ranking](/ranking) which orders the games I've completed from
those I most enjoyed to those I least enjoyed. I actually enjoyed this game until the final dungeon, but the endgame was
so unpleasant, it ruined the whole experience. I had more fun with this than <GameLink slug="final_fantasy" />, but I
think the grinding is worse than <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_ii" />.

<GameRanking game={props.slug} />
