I know very little about Dragon Quest&nbsp;VII. There are a lot of RPGs on the PlayStation, but I rarely hear about this
one. The last two games in the series left me a little disappointed with their thin stories, so I'm approaching this one
with mellowed expectations.

<GameHeader game={props.game} />

Dragon Quest&nbsp;VII is such a strange game that I'm not even sure where to begin.

It's the first (and only) game in the series on the PlayStation. In my opinion, the game does not make good use of the
console. Visually, the game does not fully commit to 3D as there are 2D sprites layered over 3D backgrounds. These 3D
backgrounds have low quality textures, so the whole thing looks very ugly to me &mdash; I very much preferred the pure
2D aesthetic of the SNES games instead. I was also disappointed with how there are barely any FMVs. Somehow this game
spans two disks, but I have no idea what all that space was used for!

Once again, Dragon Quest&nbsp;VII has some good plot ideas, but there isn't enough story to keep my interest. The
majority of the game is centered around a fairly unique and interesting concept: <Spoiler>restoring the world, piece by
piece like a giant jigsaw puzzle.</Spoiler> This was fun for a few hours, but it moves at such a _slow_ pace.
Additionally, the game has many segments without any battles and/or requires backtracking across many screens.
**Honestly, it felt like the game just does not respect the player's time.**  You could even argue that the main story
doesn't really begin until _50 hours in_, which is just absurd.

The core gameplay is very similar to <GameLink slug="dragon_quest_vi" />, with a hierarchical job system unlocked
several hours in. Unfortunately the jobs seemed _even less balanced_ than before! 0&nbsp;MP skills are still vastly
better than magic spells, and insanely powerful skills (e.g. SwordDanc) are available very early. It was very
frustrating to see so much effort and variety in the job system, only to find that most of the jobs were completely
useless. On top of all this, it felt like jobs leveled very slowly, perhaps because of the long periods without battles.

Party composition was also a huge source of frustration for me. There are several points in the story when a party
member abruptly leaves for long periods of time. When you factor in the slow grind of the job system, this could be
diastruous &mdash; for example, what if that party member was your primary healer? Plotwise, some of these events felt
like weak writing, reminding me of the awkward excuses for party changes in <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_iv" />. For
reasons unknown, the wagon mechanic of previous games is absent. By the end of the game, you are left with 5 characters
but only 4 party slots. Again, factoring in the slow grind of the job system, this means someone is the odd one out and
left to rot for the rest of the game. <Spoiler>(I picked Melvin, because Maribel was my only mage. Besides, Melvin was
pretty underwhelming and unconvincing as the legendary hero...)</Spoiler>

Finally, while it's not really significant in the grand scheme of things, I just need to vent about this plot twist:
<Spoiler>I am still pissed that Kiefer abruptly left the party permanently about 15 hours in. I thought he was the most
interesting character, and he was easily my favorite. He was also the strongest character at that point, so the party
shrinking from 4 to 3 characters was really painful for awhile.</Spoiler>

<LikedDisliked>
  <LikedList>
    <LikedItem>Main plot device (<Spoiler>restoring the world</Spoiler>)</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Job system with hybrid jobs</LikedItem>
  </LikedList>
  <DislikedList>
    <DislikedItem>The main plotline doesn't really take off until _50 hours in_</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Party members abruptly leave for long periods of time</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Long sections of backtracking and/or no battles</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Jobs seem _even less balanced_ than before</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Jobs require significant grinding</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Ugly 3D maps with 2D sprites, few FMVs</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Small soundtrack gets very repetitive</DislikedItem>
  </DislikedList>
</LikedDisliked>

After completing a game, I add it to [my overall enjoyment ranking](/ranking) which orders the games I've completed from
those I most enjoyed to those I least enjoyed. I did not enjoy this game very much, so the only question is how low to
place it. NES RPGs like <GameLink slug="final_fantasy" /> are thin and grindy, but they are much shorter than Dragon
Quest&nbsp;VII which is just way too long and slow. The story was more interesting than
<GameLink slug="lightning_returns" /> though, so I'll place this above it.

<GameRanking game={props.slug} />
