Dragon Quest&nbsp;III is one of the more popular games in the series, especially in Japan. I _think_ I've played the
GameBoy Color remake, but I've definitely never played the original. Does this classic game still hold up decades later?

<GameHeader game={props.game} />

The distinctive feature of Dragon Quest&nbsp;III is the party creation. The hero is the only required character (and
only character relevant to the story), but you can create three more characters to fill out your party. Similar to
<GameLink slug="final_fantasy" />, there are several character classes to choose from which adds some variance and
replayability to the game. After level 20, created characters can class change to any of the other jobs. This resets the
character back to level 1, but they retain half their stats and all learned magic. Class changing is not _necessary_ to
beat the game, but it certainly makes things more interesting.

There are a few quality-of-life improvements over the previous games. The Return spell can now teleport to almost any
town that you have previously visited. This is a very welcome change since it cuts down on the boring backtracking (and
random encounters) across the world map in the mid-game. There's also a vault in the first town which has two purposes:
storing extra items (including key items that are not currently useful) and storing gold safely without losing half of
it in the event of a party wipe.

Dragon Quest&nbsp;III does have more story than the previous games, but it's still minimal by modern standards.
There isn't much progress on the main storyline until the final quarter of the game, though there are some small
self-contained stories in several of the towns across the map. The big reveal of <Spoiler>Zoma and the dark
world</Spoiler> was a nice surprise but the <Spoiler>brief reunion with Ortega</Spoiler> was very underwhelming.

Unfortunately Dragon Quest&nbsp;III requires a fair amount of grinding, both for leveling and to get enough gold for
upgrading equipment. The need for grinding is fairly constant throughout the game &mdash; I remember significant
grinding around Romaly, after class changing, and before each of the last two bosses. The frequent grinding was my
biggest complaint with the game and I think it &mdash; or at least this version &mdash; has aged poorly because of this.
I _did_ actually somewhat enjoy grinding after class changing though because it felt rewarding to level up those
characters so quickly.

<LikedDisliked>
  <LikedList>
    <LikedItem>Can Return to almost every town</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Party building and class changing</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>The vault</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Non-linear mid-game section</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Memorable music</LikedItem>
  </LikedList>
  <DislikedList>
    <DislikedItem>Grinding required (for levels and gold)</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Magic attacks underwhelming</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Minimal plot</DislikedItem>
  </DislikedList>
</LikedDisliked>

After completing a game, I add it to [my overall enjoyment ranking](/ranking) which orders the games I've completed from
those I most enjoyed to those I least enjoyed. I generally enjoyed Dragon Quest&nbsp;III, but there was a little too
much grinding for me. Although <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_ii" /> was less grindy, I think it was a little more
frustrating to play (due to dungeon design and hidden mechanics), so I'll put Dragon Quest&nbsp;III above it.

<b>Edit:</b> Bumping this game up a bit since I was comparing it too much to just NES games. Despite the grinding, I
enjoyed this game more than <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_viii" /> or <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_xiii" />.

<GameRanking game={props.slug} />
