I've been generally disappointed with the Dragon Quest series, but <GameLink slug="dragon_quest_viii" /> was a game that
I really enjoyed. Dragon Quest&nbsp;IX was made by the same developer, so I'm hoping I'll enjoy this one too.

<GameHeader game={props.game} />

With Dragon Quest&nbsp;IX, the series made the uncommon jump from consoles to a handheld. While the DS was powerful for
a handheld, it was obviously limited in comparison to the PS2. Dragon Quest&nbsp;IX is mostly 3D, though some NPCs use
2D sprites, similar to <GameLink slug="dragon_quest_vii" />. This is awkward and clunky, because the 2D sprites cannot
rotate smoothly with the camera changes. And while most of the game _is_ in 3D, the DS hardware is more limited than the
PS2 hardware, resulting in "uglier" 3D (for lack of a better word). This was a little disappointing because Dragon
Quest&nbsp;VIII was such a beautiful game.

Probably the biggest reason that I enjoyed Dragon Quest&nbsp;VIII was its strong central narrative and memorable cast of
characters. Unfortunately, Dragon Quest&nbsp;IX is completely the opposite. The main story is once again meager and
barebones, barely present after the prologue. The party is once again filled with generic create-a-characters, as in
<GameLink slug="dragon_quest_iii" />, so they are absent from the story. Instead, an NPC named Stella joins the party
and provides commentary about what is happening. However, this gyaru fairy seldom had anything important to say and
quickly became an annoyance. The main story _does_ finally pick up some steam around 25 hours in, but by that point I
was no longer interested and just wanted to move on to something else.

Dragon Quest&nbsp;IX has _a lot_ of side quests. So many, that they are numbered and tracked in a journal.
Unfortunately, these are the dull MMO style quests: boring fetch quests and other mundane tasks, requested by disposable
NPCs with no significance to anything. Even worse, most the quest rewards did not seem to be worth the effort either.
(However, a few quests grant new jobs which are definitely worth doing.) I quickly stopped bothering with these
because they felt like filler and a waste of time.

While the story was a huge flop, the core gameplay was good. There are no more random encounters &mdash; battles are
started by walking into a monster on the map. This makes metal slime hunting a little less painful, since you can avoid
the other monsters. The game also felt well balanced because I never really needed to stop and grind for hours to
progress.

Dragon Quest&nbsp;IX combines a job system (somewhat similar to Dragon Quest&nbsp;III) with the skill trees of Dragon
Quest&nbsp;VIII, which provides a lot of customization and choices for your party. However, because class changing
resets the character's level _and_ they don't keep any stat gains, it felt kind of detrimental to class change.
Additionally, spells (unlike skills) can only be used in the original class that unlocked them, so class changing
spellcasters seemed especially bad.

In the end, Dragon Quest&nbsp;IX was one of the most boring and uninteresting games that I have played in a while. I
found myself completely unmotivated to play it, and there were many days that I chose to do something else with my
free time instead. If I wasn't trying to finish the entire Dragon Quest series, I would've abandoned the game very early
on.

<LikedDisliked>
  <LikedList>
    <LikedItem>No random encounters</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Very little grinding required</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Party customization</LikedItem>
  </LikedList>
  <DislikedList>
    <DislikedItem>Minimal central narrative</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>100+ filler side quests</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Stella</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Class changes didn't seem very useful</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Ugly 3D, plus some 2D sprites</DislikedItem>
  </DislikedList>
</LikedDisliked>

After completing a game, I add it to [my overall enjoyment ranking](/ranking) which orders the games I've completed from
those I most enjoyed to those I least enjoyed. This is easily one of my least favorite games so far, so the only
question is how low it will go. <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_x_2" /> also had a bunch of filler side quests, but at
least it had a (very awful) central narrative that I wanted to know the resolution to. Meanwhile, the original
<GameLink slug="dragon_quest" /> barely qualifies as a game by modern expectations, so I'll safely place Dragon
Quest&nbsp;IX above that (and only that).

<GameRanking game={props.slug} />
