I completely ignored Final Fantasy&nbsp;XV when it came out. Square Enix's games in the previous 5-10 years had
generally disappointed me and I wasn't playing many RPGs. I was gifted a copy of the game several years ago, but it's
been left in its shrinkwrap collecting dust. Well, it's time for me to finally play this game!

<GameHeader game={props.game} />

<Note>Final Fantasy&nbsp;XV had significant changes after its initial release, with many patches and additional paid
content. Although the Royal Edition&nbsp;/ Windows Edition is now the most convenient way to purchase everything, all of
the content and changes are still available for the original base game, so I do not consider it a different game.</Note>

The defining characteristic of Final Fantasy&nbsp;XV is its open world. Battles take place directly on the map without
any separate battle screens, similar to <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_xii" />. However, this time the map is seamless
instead of being divided into smaller zones. Unfortunately, points of interest are usually too far apart to walk which
makes travel tedious without the car or a chocobo. Driving quickly becomes boring once the novelty wears off as there is
little to do during the ride. Fast travel is an alternative, but it comes with long loading screens. While I enjoyed
exploring the map, the pain of long travel was probably my biggest complaint about the game.

Combat in Final Fantasy&nbsp;XV is truly real-time as there are no charge times or ATB bars to slow down combat.
Combined with the battles directly on the map, this made battles feel faster and less tedious than older games.
Things can get pretty hectic with a lot of targets, warp-strikes, and phasing. I got frustrated that the lock-on feature
seemed to frequently lose my desired target. Combat itself is very simple &mdash; there's really only one attack button
and one dodge/guard button. I still enjoyed battles, but that may be due to the novelty since I do not frequently play
action games.

The game can be roughly divided into two parts: the first half is light on plot and encourages open world exploration,
while the second half focuses on the plot and puts the party on rails (complete with no backtracking, just like
<GameLink slug="final_fantasy_xiii" />). I liked this because I got to explore and get the side quests out of the way
early while the game still feels fresh, while the story towards the end kept my interest in finishing the game.

I thought the story was interesting, but there is a serious issue with how it is presented in game. There are a few
glaring gaps in the story (<Spoiler>party members leaving, time skips</Spoiler>) that are barely explained in the base
game. These gaps were eventually filled in with DLC, but they are not directly integrated into the main game. Instead,
they are self-contained bonus games, complete with their own main menus and saves. It is very jarring to go back and
forth between the main game and the DLC. Overall, I thought the DLC was a disappointment. Episode Gladiolus is filler.
Episode Prompto suddenly ends just as it was getting interesting and without filling the entire story gap. Episode
Ignis was the only DLC I enjoyed, but I wish it was integrated in the main story. Unforunately, it unnecessarily
contains massive spoilers at the end, so I would not recommend playing it until beating the game. (Seriously?) Finally,
Episode Ardyn is decent, but it's salvaged from a cancelled four-part DLC series. This series would have led to an
alternate ending for the main game and seemed to retcon some characters, which makes it kind of pointless to play now.

The other issue I had with the story is that many of the NPCs felt underdeveloped. There are several characters that are
introduced but are only met once or twice before they disappear from the game. <Spoiler>It's also disappointing that
most characters are not seen again in Chapter 14 after the big time skip.</Spoiler> Despite those issues, I _did_ enjoy
the story overall. In particular, I found the main villain different and interesting. The party characters are also very
distinct and memorable.

I went in to this game with low expectations for an open world Final Fantasy, but I ended up having a lot of fun. It's
a little frustrating to think about how the game could've been more polished and cohesive, but I still enjoyed the final
product.

<LikedDisliked>
  <LikedList>
    <LikedItem>No separate battle screens</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Fixed party, no extra characters</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Open world in first half, but story focus in second half</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Interesting villain</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Great soundtrack</LikedItem>
  </LikedList>
  <DislikedList>
    <DislikedItem>Long loading times</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Driving is boring</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Obvious gaps in main story for DLC</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Many NPCs feel underdeveloped</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>DLC underwhelming, not well integrated</DislikedItem>
  </DislikedList>
</LikedDisliked>

After completing a game, I add it to [my overall enjoyment ranking](/ranking) which orders the games I've completed from
those I most enjoyed to those I least enjoyed. I really enjoyed this game &mdash; much more than I expected to &mdash;
despite its issues. I particularly enjoyed the focus on the story in the second half, which kept my interest in
finishing the game. I'll put this above <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_vi" /> which started amazingly strong but lost my
interest in the second half.

<GameRanking game={props.slug} />
