Final Fantasy&nbsp;XII marks a major turning point in the series for several reasons. The game had a very long
development period during which Square merged into Square Enix, and several influential people left the company. Final
Fantasy&nbsp;XI was an MMORPG and there was some uncertainty about the future of the Final Fantasy series. I was in
college when XII came out and I barely remember playing it. Given that context, I was looking forward to play this game
again.

<GameHeader game={props.game} />

The battles in this game are probably the biggest change from previous games. First, battles occur directly on the map
without a separate battle screen. Second, your party members can be programmed to act automatically with the "gambit"
system. You can still override this with manual input at any time, so there is little downside to it. I generally
enjoyed the battles as I found it to be smoother and less tedious than previous games. My biggest complaint is that many
useful gambits are locked by story progression, which means that the AI is unnecessarily dumb for much of the game.

Characters unlock abilities (including abilities to wear equipment) on the "license board". In theory, this flexibility
allows for a lot of customization. However, I found just the opposite &mdash;  once license points were no longer
scarce, my main characters all had basically the same build. Since my characters were functionally identical and the
plot never forces specific characters into the party, I just stopped using half of them completely. In my opinion, this
is a very big design flaw.

It can be frustrating to acquire good equipment in this game. Almost every treasure chest has randomized content, but
some will never respawn. This means it's possible to miss (powerful) unique items from chests in the endgame. In my
opinion, that is also very bad design. Some equipment is only obtainable from the "bazaar" &mdash; a special store that
sells items based off the "loot" you have previously sold. Unfortunately the bazaar recipes, are not listed in-game and
some of them require grinding chains of loot to fulfill. I typically do all sidequests and optional dungeons for
"ultimate equipment", but this time I only bothered to get the two easiest ones (i.e. no bazaar, no random chests):
the Zodiac Spear and Masamune.

I did like the story in Final Fantasy&nbsp;XII, but it will not be for everyone. While Final Fantasy is typically known
for character-driven adventures, this game is a political war drama. Instead of character growth and romance, there is
intrigue and political scheming. While the story started off strong, I felt that things kind of fell apart towards the
end. <Spoiler>After Vayne seizes power, it felt like the world came to standstill and the party was just marching
back-and-forth across the map.</Spoiler> The other odd thing is how the characters <Spoiler>Vaan and Penelo</Spoiler>
seem irrelevant to the plot and bolted-on. <Spoiler>Ashe and Basch are much more important to the story, yet they were
the last two characters to join the party.</Spoiler>

This game has a _ton_ of optional content, mostly in the form of hunts and espers. I normally don't comment on this, but
given the sheer volume and how they are generally more difficult than the main quest, completing these will make the
main quest trivial. Unfortunately, I also found many of their rewards to be unsatisfying, so I stopped doing them. It
would have helped if espers weren't so useless gameplay-wise.

Ultimately, I have mixed feelings about the game. There are some things I think it does very well, but there are other
things that felt either incomplete or just not very fun. I did really enjoy the game in the beginning, but by the end I
was glad to be done with it &mdash; I skipped a fair amount of the optional content at the end. The&nbsp;Zodiac Age
re-release makes some significant changes to the game and I am interested in playing that eventually to see whether
those changes improve the game.

<LikedDisliked>
  <LikedList>
    <LikedItem>Gambits make combat less tedious</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>No separate battle screens</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Political story</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Hunts are more enjoyable than typical sidequests</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>World feels big, "alive", and is fun to explore</LikedItem>
  </LikedList>
  <DislikedList>
    <DislikedItem>One big license board reduces specialization</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Gambits gated by story progression</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Unique equipment in random chests</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Bazaar is mysterious and grindy</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem><Spoiler>Vaan and especially Penelo</Spoiler> seem irrelevant to the story</DislikedItem>
  </DislikedList>
</LikedDisliked>

After completing a game, I add it to [my overall enjoyment ranking](/ranking) which orders the games I've completed from
those I most enjoyed to those I least enjoyed. This is a tough one for me to rank because of how my feelings changed
during my playthrough. It's definitely below <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_iv" />, which was a quick and solid
adventure. Overall, I think I enjoyed <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_iii" /> just a bit more, so I'll slide this under
it.

<GameRanking game={props.slug} />
