While my plan to play all of the Final Fantasy games was well underway when Final Fantasy&nbsp;XVI was released, I did
not own a PS5 at the time. Now that I have one, I can finally play the most recent game and claim to have played every
game in the series. I didn't follow the pre-release hype and I've managed to avoid spoilers, so I'm going into this one
fairly blind.

<GameHeader game={props.game} />

This was the first game in the series with a M rating. There are several violent and bloody scenes, and there is a lot
of profanity. This was jarring for me at first as it didn't _feel_ like Final Fantasy, but I got over it eventually.
While the series has always had dark themes and brutal moments, I wasn't comfortable playing the main story in front of
my children, so it was harder for me to find time to play.

As expected of the Final Fantasy series, Final Fantasy&nbsp;XVI has a big story with a lot of dialogue. There is a lot
of politics and intrigue which reminded me of <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_xii" />. However, I thought this game does a
much better job balancing that with the individual characters and their motives.

Overall, I enjoyed the story. There's a lot going on in this game and I was surprised by a few of the plot twists.
I was a little disappointed how some of the plotlines turned out to be somewhat insigificant in the end. I was
particuarly interested in both <Spoiler>the second dominant of fire and Anabella's scheming, but both of those plotlines
kind of fizzled out unsatisfyingly. (I still don't really understand what actually happened at Phoenix Gate in the
prologue.)</Spoiler> I also thought the final villain did not explain their motives very well, so I lost some interest
towards the end of the game.

Perhaps the most controversial thing about Final Fantasy&nbsp;XVI is the combat. Personally, I didn't think it was
_that_ big of a leap from <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_xv" />. I enjoyed unlocking new abilities during the game, but
it seemed like many of them were not that useful. Smaller enemies are laughable, so the only things that really mattered
were staggering large enemies quickly and dealing burst damage during the stagger. I did quite enjoy the eikon battle
sequences as they were exciting and broke up the monotony.

The worst part of the game are the boring fetch quests, and thus most of the side quests. I thought there was generally
good pacing and balance between the story scenes and the gameplay, but the tedious fetch quests just grind everything to
a halt. The vast majority of side quests in this game are just a bunch of bland dialogue, marching across the map, and
_maybe_ a fight against some common enemies. Worse, most of these quests only grant common commodities as rewards, which
makes the whole thing a waste of time. Of course, side quests are optional, so most of these can be skipped entirely.
The few side quests that actually bestow something useful are even marked with a different symbol in-game, seemingly
acknowledging that everything else is filler. Unfortunately, there are some mandatory fetch quests mid-game that cannot
be avoided &mdash; this part was easily the worst section of the story.

I was also disappointed that gear and levels did not seem particularly important. While there are visible stats, the
gains are small and I never noticed any big improvements after upgrading or leveling up. (Power jumps were primarily due
to new abilities instead.) In my opinion, these are defining fetures of the RPG genre, so you could argue that Final
Fantasy&nbsp;XVI is more of an (story-rich) action game than an RPG.

<LikedDisliked>
  <LikedList>
    <LikedItem>Complex plot</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>No separate battle screens</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Eikon battle sequences</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Active Time Lore helps keep track of everything</LikedItem>
  </LikedList>
  <DislikedList>
    <DislikedItem>Story drags a bit after 20-30 hours</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Banal side quests with trivial rewards</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Level ups and gear feel unimportant</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Quick time events in boss battles</DislikedItem>
  </DislikedList>
</LikedDisliked>

After completing a game, I add it to [my overall enjoyment ranking](/ranking) which orders the games I've completed from
those I most enjoyed to those I least enjoyed. I generally enjoyed Final Fantasy&nbsp;XVI, but the side quests were
awful filler that dragged the game out. I'll place it below <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_iv" /> which was more
streamlined and consistent.

<GameRanking game={props.slug} />
