Now that I've completed the mainline Phantasy Star series, I'm ready to start another classic RPG series. Since that was
Sega's first-party series, I think I'll go with one of Nintendo's: Mother. I don't know much about the first game, but
the series is well-known for it's goofy sense of humor and for its unconventional setting and story (for RPGs). This is
another 8-bit game, so I have lower expectations for the gameplay (i.e. I'm prepared for grinding).

<GameHeader game={props.game} />

<Note>Mother is a confusing series for Americans because we only got the second game of the three game series, which
was released here as EarthBound. However, a translation for this first game was completed, but cancelled before release.
Confusingly, this game was to be named Earth Bound (note the extra space), as seen in the title screen. When Mother was
_finally_  officially released in 2015, it was renamed EarthBound Beginnings. Mother is _also_ frequently known as
EarthBound Zero, after the title screen in the original leak of the unreleased translation.</Note>

Well, it took me a long time to complete Mother, but it wasn't because the game was long. Mother starts off pretty slow
with a lot of grinding (which is not uncommon for an 8-bit RPG), and I just lost interest in the game. I got distracted
by other things and took a break from RPGs for 7 months. I picked it up again in May and finished it in a week.

In many ways, Mother plays like a parody of <GameLink slug="dragon_quest_ii" />. The game starts off linear as you
assemble the party, but becomes somewhat open-ended as you collect the MacGuffins scattered throughout the world. Along
the way, you stumble through some towns with some local problem that is insingificant to the greater plot, but you still
solve it out of the goodness of your heart anyway. The final dungeons are very painful to navigate, and it is best to
run from the random battles as they can easily wipe out your party at a moment's notice. (The encounter rate in this
game is excruciatingly high too!)

The main feature of Mother, in my opinion, is its quirky and whimsical atmosphere. Instead of the high fantasy setting
with knights and wizards, there are goofy kids in suburbia with boomerangs and explosives. Instead of dragons or demons,
there are wild animals, hippies, gang members, and trucks. The soundtrack is similarly unconventional, memorably
including some early rock and roll style songs.

Unfortunately, I found the story too minimal to keep my interest, especially in the beginning. While there were some
interesting lore dumps towards the end, it was too little too late for me. Mother was probably interesting and different
at the time of its release, but has not aged well.

<LikedDisliked>
  <LikedList>
    <LikedItem>Whimsical theme, novelty</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Memorable and unique soundtrack</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>It's a short game</LikedItem>
  </LikedList>
  <DislikedList>
    <DislikedItem>Significant grinding, especially early</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Minimal story, especially early</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Big maps, labyrinth dungeons, backtracking</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Very high encounter rate</DislikedItem>
  </DislikedList>
</LikedDisliked>

After completing a game, I add it to [my overall enjoyment ranking](/ranking) which orders the games I've completed from
those I most enjoyed to those I least enjoyed. I did not enjoy Mother, and found it fairly tedious to play. While it is
mercifully much shorter than <GameLink slug="dragon_quest_vii" />, I found it much less interesting than
<GameLink slug="phantasy_star_iii" />.

<GameRanking game={props.slug} />
