Phantasy Star is mostly forgotten now, but it was one of the first console RPGs. While it competed with
<GameLink slug="dragon_quest_iii" /> and <GameLink slug="final_fantasy" /> in Japan, Phantasy Star was actually the
first console RPG translated and released in the US, over a year before <GameLink slug="dragon_quest" />. I was pretty
excited to check out this historic game (and series), but I set low expectations for an early 8-bit console RPG.

<GameHeader game={props.game} />

Phantasy Star looks great, even today. This is the first Master System game that I've ever played and it seems much more
colorful and detailed than any NES game that I've played so far. In fact, it reminded me more of a 16-bit game, than an
8-bit game. I also enjoyed the soundtrack for this game.

The story is pretty much what I expected for an 8-bit console RPG &mdash; the big bad guy Lassic must die. While
Phantasy Star has nice looking dialogue scenes, there aren't any full cutscenes that show anything happening, so there
aren't really any twists or events along the way. (Ok, _something_ happens after <Spoiler>Lassic is defeated</Spoiler>,
but it comes and goes so fast that I honestly didn't understand what even happened.)

Phantasy Star uses a first-person view for dungeons. I think this was common for 80's computer RPGs, but it's unusual
for a console RPG. I enjoyed it at first when the dungeons were simple, but things quickly get more complicated and I
didn't want to deal with it. I found maps online for the dungeons and used those to save time.

Combat is pretty standard for the time with turn-based battles. The animated enemy sprites are a nice touch, but after
awhile they really just slow down and drag out the battles. The most annoying thing was the inability to pick targets
when there are multiple enemies &mdash; the game seemed to pick targets randomly, which can make battles harder than
necessary. Phantasy Star also seems like it has the highest encounter rate of any game I've played so far &mdash; there
were several times I had an encounter after a single step (or even immediately after running away in a dungeon). All of
these factors made the game a bit of a slog to finish.

Finally, it is unsurprising that Phantasy Star requires some dedicated grinding. This is especially true in the first
hour or so, where you can be very easily killed in just one or two turns if you wander into the wrong tile. However, I
found that I didn't really need to grind after the full party was assembled. The few times I did grind later on were
generally just for some money, not levels.

<LikedDisliked>
  <LikedList>
    <LikedItem>Looks great for a 1980's game</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Can save anywhere, anytime</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Memorable music</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>It's a short game</LikedItem>
  </LikedList>
  <DislikedList>
    <DislikedItem>First-person dungeon crawling</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Very high encounter rate</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Seemingly random enemy targetting</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Minimal plot</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Grinding required</DislikedItem>
  </DislikedList>
</LikedDisliked>

After completing a game, I add it to [my overall enjoyment ranking](/ranking) which orders the games I've completed from
those I most enjoyed to those I least enjoyed. Phantasy Star has far less plot than
<GameLink slug="final_fantasy_ii" />, but it doesn't require as much grinding as <GameLink slug="dragon_quest_ii" />.
(Both Dragon Quest II and Phantasy Star are much harder without a guide.)

<GameRanking game={props.slug} />
