To be honest, I haven't really enjoyed the Phantasy Star series so far. The <GameLink slug="phantasy_star">first
game</GameLink> had some charm to it, but the first three games were all very dated, grindy, and light on story. It
seems like Phantasy Star&nbsp;IV is very popular online, so I'm hoping that I'll finally have a positive experience with
the final mainline game.

<GameHeader game={props.game} />

While <GameLink slug="phantasy_star_ii"/> and <GameLink slug="phantasy_star_iii"/> were also Genesis games, Phantasy
Star&nbsp;IV is the first one that finally feels like a 16-bit RPG. It's a huge improvement in every way &mdash; the
menus are much less tedious to navigate, the story is way more fleshed out, and the graphics and music are both
comparable to any of the more famous SNES games.

In many ways, Phantasy Star&nbsp;IV reminds me of <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_iv" />. It's a short and simple game
with a heavy plot focus. I really liked how the manga-style panels added a cinematic quality to the cutscenes &mdash;
they made the scenes much more vivid and engaging than any other 16-bit RPG that I've played. I was hooked immediately
and I couldn't stop playing. I ended up binging through the entire game in only 7 days.

I found the story pretty interesting. The game has great pacing (I don't recall any significant grinding), and there are
many plot twists along the way. It did get a little tired <Spoiler>"killing" Dark Force three times</Spoiler> though. I
appreciated the various callbacks and references to the previous games in the series. (But the game also reviews the key
events so it's not necessary to have played them.)

There isn't much that stands out in terms of gameplay. Like Final Fantasy&nbsp;IV, the party members change at fixed
points in the story, and the character growth seemed fixed. The only relatively novel feature was the ability to define
macros: an ordered list of actions for your party to execute in a single turn of combat. However, after a few hours I
felt that this was more effort to maintain than the effort saved just manually selecting the desired actions (thanks to
the cursor memory QoL improvement). And while macros are probably the only reliable way to use the powerful combo
skills, they are not listed anywhere in the game, so I had no idea how to trigger most of them.

<LikedDisliked>
  <LikedList>
    <LikedItem>Very plot-focused with good pacing</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Manga panel cutscenes</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Great soundtrack</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>It's a short game</LikedItem>
  </LikedList>
  <DislikedList>
    <DislikedItem>Undocumented combo skills are hard to discover</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>No customization</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem><Spoiler>"Killing" Dark Force repeatedly</Spoiler> gets stale</DislikedItem>
  </DislikedList>
</LikedDisliked>

After completing a game, I add it to [my overall enjoyment ranking](/ranking) which orders the games I've completed from
those I most enjoyed to those I least enjoyed. I really enjoyed Phantasy Star&nbsp;IV, so the question this time is just
how high it will go. <GameLink slug="final_fantasy_vi" /> started stronger, but Phantasy Star&nbsp;IV was more
consistently entertaining for me. However, I think I enjoyed the plot of <GameLink slug="dragon_quest_viii" /> just a
bit more.

<GameRanking game={props.slug} />
