---
title: Final Fantasy VIII
date: '2022-11-11'
data:
  year: 1999
  system: PlayStation
  developer: Square
  publisher: Square
  covers:
  - src: /assets/final_fantasy_viii/cover-us.jpg
    caption: US Cover
  - src: /assets/final_fantasy_viii/cover-jp.jpg
    caption: Japan Cover
---

Final&nbsp;Fantasy&nbsp;VIII is a game I had never played before and I had very little knowledge about it. Despite being
released during Square's "golden era", it seems to be less popular than the other games released during that time. With
that context, I was very excited to play this game.

<GameHeader />

Unfortunately, I felt this game started off on the wrong foot immediately. The opening FMV is a confusing blur that
blends a proper prologue scene (the duel) with teasers of FMVs from later in the game (everything else). The game itself
then begins with little up-front explanation of what is going on or anyone's motivations. This made me start losing
interest very early on. (Who is Galbadia? Are they "evil"? Should I even care?)

Things continue to be only loosely explained as the game progresses. Some plot lines are just dropped without resolution
and several plot twists felt absurd. A quick list of the main things that bothered me: <Spoiler>Seifer's irrelevence,
Squall's impalement, NORG, Squall in charge of Balamb Garden, the forgotten memories, and Squall's abrupt obsession with
Rinoa.</Spoiler> As a whole, the plot felt disorganized and rushed. Overall, I think I enjoyed the Laguna sub-story more
than the main story itself.

Final&nbsp;Fantasy&nbsp;VIII has several experimental mechanics. Instead of MP or spell charges, spells are a consumable
item held by a character. However, these consumables are not bought, they must be either "drawn" (stolen) from enemies
in combat or acquired by dismantling playing cards. Instead of conventional equipment, these spells can be "junctioned"
(equipped) to character's stats to raise them. The effectiveness of the junction scales with the quantity of the spell
held, which discourages actually casting them. While these are interesting concepts, they made combat extremely tedious
to me: if the enemy has a new spell, then I spent 10-15 minutes drawing it until the party was maxed out, otherwise
everyone just used "Attack".

Most enemies in this game are leveled to match your party level. Overall, this did not seem to have much an impact on my
playthrough, but the final boss(es) were notably challenging. (I was overleveled since I completed everything.) Since
there's not much reward for leveling up and combat is tedious, by end game I was frequently using the "Enc-None" ability
to disable random battles.

Sadly, the Triple&nbsp;Triad minigame is probably what I enjoyed most about this game. This card game can be played with
most NPCs, so it's always available. There are a variety of different rules that can modify the game, and I still don't
fully understand what all of them do! However, it also allows you to really break the game early since by dismantling 
ertain cards into late game magic (which can then be junctioned!). I generally tried to avoid acquiring magic early this
way to preserve some challenge.

<LikedDisliked>
  <LikedList>
    <LikedItem>Triple&nbsp;Triad minigame</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Final boss(es) difficulty</LikedItem>
  </LikedList>
  <DislikedList>
    <DislikedItem>Junction system and drawing magic</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Loosely explained plot with absurd plot twists</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Slow pacing in disc 1</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Bland soundtrack</DislikedItem>
  </DislikedList>
</LikedDisliked>

After completing a game, I add it to [my overall enjoyment ranking](/ranking) which orders the games I've completed from
those I most enjoyed to those I least enjoyed. I was thoroughly disappointed with this game and may have abandoned it if
I wasn't committed to playing the entire series. The plot is a mess, but I'd probably prefer playing this again over
Final&nbsp;Fantasy&nbsp;II.

<GameRanking game={slug} />
