---
title: Final Fantasy VII
date: '2022-10-14'
data:
  year: 1997
  system: PlayStation
  developer: Square
  publisher: Square
  covers:
  - src: /assets/final_fantasy_vii/cover-us.jpg
    caption: US Cover
  - src: /assets/final_fantasy_vii/cover-jp.jpg
    caption: Japan Cover
---
Final&nbsp;Fantasy&nbsp;VII is hugely popular, but I've never actually completed it before. As a child, I got about
halfway before I abandoned it for some reason. I've actually always had some resentment for this game, but I'm not
entirely sure why &mdash; perhaps because it has overshadowed the previous games that I had enjoyed so much as a child.
Now it's time for me to finally give this game a fair chance.

<GameHeader />

Immediately, the game makes a great impression with the smooth transition from the intro FMV, to a little cutscene, and
into the first battle. FMVs are used with great effect in this game and it's a big improvement over the previous console
generation. However, I was occasionally frustrated with the 3D maps because it was occasionally difficult to walk where
I wanted to go. (The game predates the analog DualShock controller.)

Moving even further from high fantasy and doubling down on the steampunk style, the dystopian city of Midgar is such a
memorable and iconic setting. The prologue in Midgar is so long that I thought the entire game would occur there &mdash;
I remember being surprised the first time I saw the world map. <Spoiler>Personally, I found the Shinra corporation a
much more interesting opponent than Sephiroth, so I was disappointed when they became less important for a large portion
of the game. Compared to previous villains, Sephiroth is elusive and enigmatic &mdash; it's unclear what his goals are
for a long time and he barely interacts with the party. On the other hand, Shinra is a more traditional villain that
directly engages the party on multiple occasions and I think the Sector 7 plate drop is one of the most evil events
in the series.</Spoiler>

The story in this game is highly memorable for its many twists. In particular, Cloud's personal arc felt so unique and
unconventional. <Spoiler>The game even ends on a cliffhanger without clearly explaining final outcome &mdash; the planet
survives, but it's ambiguous whether mankind has survived.</Spoiler>

I do have a few complaints about the game. I thought the game felt a little slow for most of disc 1. The first couple
events are interweaved with a bunch of exposition, introducing characters and Midgar. However, after <Spoiler>leaving
Midgar</Spoiler> it feels like the party is just aimlessly wandering across the map <Spoiler>in search of Sephiroth for
no particularly clear reason</Spoiler>. I began to lose interest here and this may be why I abandoned the game before.
Thankfully, once the story finally picks up it gets really interesting and I had no problem finishing it.

I was not a fan of the materia system. Early on, materia is in short supply, so I was constantly juggling them between
party members which was annoying. However, by mid-game it honestly felt like most of the materia were useless anyway and
I wonder whether it was even worth the effort to train them (especially since many materia reduce strength and HP).
There are exceptions: Enemy Skill is hugely overpowered, and the infamous Knight of the Round is possibly the most
gamebreaking ability I've ever used in _any_ game. I actually decided to stop using it because I felt that it was
ruining the game!

Overall, I enjoyed this game much more this time than I did on my first abandoned attempt. I'm happy I finally beat it
so I can now fully understand all the references to such a famous game.

<LikedDisliked>
  <LikedList>
    <LikedItem>Complex plot with many twists</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>No grinding</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem><Spoiler>Ambiguous ending</Spoiler></LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Memorable soundtrack</LikedItem>
  </LikedList>
  <DislikedList>
    <DislikedItem>Slow pace early on</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Sephiroth</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Some characters have little plot relevance</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Materia system</DislikedItem>
  </DislikedList>
</LikedDisliked>

After completing a game, I add it to [my overall enjoyment ranking](/ranking) which orders the games I've completed from
those I most enjoyed to those I least enjoyed. It's a tossup with Final&nbsp;Fantasy&nbsp;VI. Both games had great plots
but suffered from some less interesting moments. I'll give the advantage to the game that finishes stronger:
Final&nbsp;Fantasy&nbsp;VII.

<GameRanking game={slug} />
