---
title: Final Fantasy III
date: '2022-06-21'
data:
  year: 1990
  system: NES
  developer: Square
  publisher: Square
  covers:
  - src: /assets/final_fantasy_iii/cover-jp.jpg
    caption: Japan Cover
---
Final&nbsp;Fantasy&nbsp;III is a game I've beaten before. I'm not talking about the DS remake either &mdash; I've beaten
this specific version before. So how does it hold up on replay?

<GameHeader/>

Before I continue, I must clarify that this version was never officially released in the US. I used the
[Alex&nbsp;W.&nbsp;Jackson&nbsp;/ Neill&nbsp;Corlett&nbsp;/ SoM2Freak&nbsp;(v1.1) translation hack](https://www.romhacking.net/translations/141/).
It's possible that this translation may have mistakes.

In my opinion, this game feels like the real sequel to the original game. The classic job system is back, but now you
can change jobs freely throughout the game. In fact, several dungeons in the game will essentially force you to use
certain jobs to advance. Although this can feel frustrating at first, it does encourage you to change jobs more often
and try more things than you may have otherwise.

Like the first game, the party consists of generic create-a-characters so there is no personal drama or character
growth. However, this time the game world is much more interesting and filled with some memorable NPCs. Overall, I think
this game provides a great sense of adventure. <Spoiler>It's a big shock when you leave the floating continent for the
first time, and it's fun to go exploring again whenever the party receives a new vehicle.</Spoiler>

This game also introduced many recurring Final&nbsp;Fantasy concepts such as summons (all iconic and well-known),
stealing (although it's honestly not worth the effort), moogles, dragoons jumping, and <Spoiler>airships with town
features.</Spoiler> This makes the game really feel like a Final&nbsp;Fantasy to me, despite the lack of interesting
party members.

The biggest downside to the game is the sudden large difficulty spike in the final quarter of the game starting at
<Spoiler>the&nbsp;Cave&nbsp;of&nbsp;Darkness</Spoiler>. While I was able to complete most of the game without any
grinding, I spent a lot of time grinding at the final dungeon which left a bit of a sour taste in my mouth.

I'll also admit that the story seems to be somehow kind of missing a primary antagonist. There are a couple characters
revealed at the end who are apparently responsible for some of the game's events, but with such little interaction and
exposure to them, they just feel like "yet another boss". Ironically, there are several minor antagonists along the way
that are more memorable.

I have not played many NES RPGs yet so I don't have a lot to compare this to. However, I suspect this is very likely to
be the best RPG available for the system. Although the endgame difficulty spike is frustrating, I have enjoyed this game
every time I've played it. I would definitely consider playing it again.

<LikedDisliked>
  <LikedList>
    <LikedItem>Job system is fun</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Wonderful soundtrack</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Big world and sense of adventure</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>It's a short game</LikedItem>
  </LikedList>
  <DislikedList>
    <DislikedItem>Endgame suddenly requires grinding</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Create-a-characters have no characterization</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>No save spots &mdash; final dungeon(s) is huge!</DislikedItem>
  </DislikedList>
</LikedDisliked>

After completing a game, I add it to [my overall enjoyment ranking](/ranking) which orders the games I've completed from
those I most enjoyed to those I least enjoyed. I think this game is superior on all aspects to the original, and the
gameplay is more fun than the second game, so Final&nbsp;Fantasy&nbsp;III is going straight to the top of my list!

<GameRanking game={slug} />
