---
title: Final Fantasy II
date: '2022-06-14'
data:
  year: 1988
  system: NES
  developer: Square
  publisher: Square
  covers:
  - src: /assets/final_fantasy_ii/cover-jp.jpg
    caption: Japan Cover
---
Final&nbsp;Fantasy&nbsp;II is an infamous game due to its experimental mechanics and extreme differences from the first
game. It is frequently described as the "worst Final&nbsp;Fantasy game". I had avoided this game for years because of
its reputation, but was it really as bad as everyone claims?

<GameHeader />

Before I continue, I must clarify that this version was never officially released in the US. I used the
[Chaos&nbsp;Rush&nbsp;(v2.2b) translation hack](https://www.romhacking.net/translations/2656/). It's possible that this
translation may have mistakes.

It's immediately clear from the opening sequence that this game is much more plot-focused than the original. The story
was interesting enough to keep my attention, but it's not as complex as later games. Notably, the three main party
members have very little characterization or personality which was a disappointment. They could have easily been
nameless create-a-characters like the previous game. I also found the story to be a little nonsensical near the end when
<Spoiler>Leon suddenly joins the party after being a major antagonist for most of the game.</Spoiler> Perhaps that part
was not translated well.

While the plot is decent, it's the gameplay that makes this game controversial. Instead of traditional character levels,
Final&nbsp;Fantasy&nbsp;II has a stat/ability training system. Essentially, a character increases their stats by "using"
them. While this sounds fine in concept, there are some serious pitfalls in the implementation.

The most serious issue is that evasion is trained solely by equipping a shield. In the endgame, there are monsters that
will inflict either instant death or petrify on attack. The only defense against this is dodging, which requires high
evasion. If you've been dual-wielding, using bows, or didn't equip your mage for the first 12-15 hours, then the game
will suddenly become almost impossible.

However, you must also be very careful not to raise your HP too high. In the endgame, some monsters can absorb a
percentage of your character's HP. If this is higher than the damage that you can deal, then things will again suddenly
be very difficult. Humorously, you can cheese some of the final bosses by using the exact same strategy against them!
<Spoiler>Don't discard the Blood Sword!</Spoiler>

Finally, magic is a tedious in this game for a few reasons. Each spell has its own skill level, which means you'll
probably stick to the first 2-5 spells you acquire. Training MP is also difficult, because you need to expend a certain
amount of MP per battle to even have a chance at gaining MP. However, the worst thing is the hidden magic penalty
mechanic that is never mentioned in-game. Every piece of equipment has a secret magic penalty value that reduces the
effectiveness of your magic when equipped. I assume this is for balanace reasons &mdash; generally, the strong "fighter"
equipment has high magic penalty. I don't have an issue with this mechanic per&nbsp;se, but you will likely have no idea
why your magic is so pitiful unless you are using a guide.

Ultimately, I enjoyed the game more than I expected to. I did enjoy the plot, but the gameplay has serious problems that
likely will prevent me from ever playing this again. Perhaps the many remakes/remasters address some of these issues?

<LikedDisliked>
  <LikedList>
    <LikedItem>Much more plot than the previous game</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>Memorable music</LikedItem>
    <LikedItem>It's a short game</LikedItem>
  </LikedList>
  <DislikedList>
    <DislikedItem>Main party characters have little characterization</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>The endgame can be very difficult if you trained incorrectly</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Secret magic penalty mechanic</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>Training magic is not practical without cancel exploit</DislikedItem>
    <DislikedItem>No save spots</DislikedItem>
  </DislikedList>
</LikedDisliked>

After completing a game, I add it to [my overall enjoyment ranking](/ranking) which orders the games I've completed from
those I most enjoyed to those I least enjoyed. I've only played two games so far, but I already have an opinion that's
probably unpopular &mdash; I enjoyed this game more than the original!

<GameRanking game={slug} />
